 Executive Summary
 Ask any organization if their culture supports performance
About the Survey
 leadership, and youʼll get a yes. Ask if their performance
 management processes actually work, and that answer
 “HR.comʼs The Future of Managing and
 changes fast.
Leading Performance 2026” survey ran
from April to July 2026. We gathered
 There may be an expectation among organizations that
 responses from 177 HR professionals in
enthusiasm translates to impact, but the reality is much more
 multiple industry verticals.
 sobering. While a majority (59%) agree or strongly agree their
 culture supports performance leadership, less than a third
 Respondents are located all over the
of organizations are highly or very effective in performance
world, but most of them reside in
 management (PM). And just a quarter give their performance
 North America, especially the United
leadership a high effectiveness rating.
States. The participants represent a
broad cross-section of employers by
Managers are stuck at the center of the problem. Nearly three-
 number of employees, ranging from
quarters of organizations say managers lack the skills to coach
small businesses to enterprises with
and develop employees, and only 36% say managers are skilled
 20,000+ employees. Two-thirds of the
at setting goals.
 respondents represent midsized and
 large organizations.
Artificial intelligence adoption is poised to help the situation;
59% of organizations plan to use AI to help write performance
reviews, though AI adoption alone canʼt cure a broken system.
To improve PM processes, organizations will need to invest
 in manager training, build accountability into the everyday
process, increase the accuracy of performance reviews, and
 build trust in PM tools.
 This report explores the trends in performance management,
discusses the challenges organizations are facing and
 recommends strategies based on the findings to help
 organizations improve their performance management
 processes.
www.hr.com   |   8   77-472-6648   |   copyright © HR.com 2 0 2 6
3 HR.com’s F uture of M anaging and L eading P erformance 2 0 2 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

 Major Findings
The following are the major research findings from our study:
 A clear divide remains between managing and leading performance.
Major
 ●   Only 30% rate their organization as highly or very highly effective
 1 Finding
in performance management, and just 25% say the same for
performance leadership.
 ●   Among organizations without a supportive culture, lack of
 leadership training (77%) and managers lacking the skills to coach
and develop employees (74%) are cited as the top barriers.
Formal performance management processes are nearly universal, but
few fully deliver on their objectives.
Major
 2 Finding  
 ●   Two-thirds of organizations have a structured, formalized PM
process, and just 2% have no process at all.
 ●   The top objectives of PM are to:
    help employees learn and grow
    boost communication between employees and managers
    meet organizational requirements (e.g., goals, compliance)
 ●   Only 32% say their process accurately portrays employee
performance, and fewer than half find it easy to understand.
 Compliance-driven and company culture outcomes still outweigh growth-
Major
oriented ones.
3 Finding
 ●   Better legal protection and reinforced company culture are the two most
 common outcomes of performance management.
 ●   Just 43% report that their ability to manage and lead performance results
in improved employee experience.
 ●   A large majority of organizations use performance management
technology to facilitate reviews (74%) and for goal tracking (72%).
 ●   Far fewer use PM technology to support learning and development (31%).
www.hr.com   |   8   77-472-6648   |   copyright © HR.com 2 0 2 6
4 HR.com’s F uture of M anaging and L eading P erformance 2 0 2 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Feedback happens often, but formal appraisals still anchor the
performance cycle.
Major Finding
 4  
 ●   In over 70% of organizations, work-related feedback is given at
least once a quarter.
 ●   Formal appraisals remain far less frequent, with 57% conducted
annually, 19% semi-annually, and only 16% more often than semi-
annually.
 ●   Two-thirds of respondents who donʼt view performance
management as relationship-building say it instead feels like an
obligation to get through.
 ●   Nearly half (47%) point to a lack of manager skill in giving
feedback as part of the problem.
 Manager capability and accountability remain critical weaknesses.
Major Finding
 ●   Only 36% of respondents say managers are skilled at setting
 5
goals and just 29% say the same about having conversations
about performance and behaviors.
 ●   However, just 37% of managers have received adequate
training in performance management, and nearly a quarter of
organizations still donʼt hold managers accountable for PM
activities in any specific way.
 ●   Tracking whether managers complete formal appraisals
 remains the top accountability method (47%), but itʼs down
 from three-fifths last year.
www.hr.com   |   877-472-6648   |   copyright © HR.com 2026
5 HR.com’s Future of Managing and Leading Performance 2026

--- PAGE BREAK ---

Interest in AI for performance management is accelerating faster
than actual adoption.
Major
 6 Finding  
 ●   Half of organizations report they are not currently using AI for
PM, though 43% expect PM to become more AI-enabled.
 ●   Concerns about accuracy or reliability (34%) and data privacy
or ethics (32%) remain the top AI barriers, but adoption is still
rising; 59% plan to use AI to help write performance reviews, up
21 percentage points from last year.
 ●   For a third of organizations, AI hasnʼt reshaped performance
expectations at all, and another third simply donʼt know if or
how it has.
 Compared to laggards, performance management leaders are:
Major
 ●   more than twice as likely to say PM improves relationships between
 7 Finding
managers and employees (82% vs. 38%).
 ●   much more likely to hold managers accountable through:
    manager KPIs (50% vs. 12%)
    employee feedback (54% vs. 13%)
    engagement/retention tracking (54% vs. 17%)
 ●   more likely to use diverse performance metrics, including:
    goal achievement (81% vs. 54%)
    360-degree feedback (50% vs. 12%)
 ●   more than twice as likely to plan on using AI for personalized
performance feedback (47% vs. 20%).
 Please note that the findings and recommendations contained in this report are informational only. Nothing in this report should be
construed as constituting legal opinions or advice. Please consult an attorney if you have questions about the legal requirements,
rules, or regulations associated with any content discussed in this report.
www.hr.com   |   8   77-472-6648   |   copyright © HR.com 2 0 2 6
6 HR.com’s F uture of M anaging and L eading P erformance 2 0 2 6

--- PAGE BREAK ---

